



RATS                                                        M. Ounsworth
Internet-Draft                                   Cryptic Forest Software
Intended status: Informational                           21 January 2026
Expires: 25 July 2026


          Privacy Framework for Remote ATtestation procedureS
             draft-ounsworth-rats-privacy-framework-latest

Abstract

   Remote Attestation Evidence, ie the measured running state of a
   device, can sometimes contain sensitive data that requires sensitive
   handling.  This document defines several categories of sensitive
   measured claims, including Personally Identifiable Information (PII),
   Device Identifiers such as serial numbers or fingerprints which can
   be used for tracking and therefore act as a proxy for PII, and Vendor
   Info which can be used to enforce vendor lock-in and thus threaten
   the openness and interoperability of the Internet.

   This document provides a framework whereby compliant devices
   categorize the claims they are capable of producing, maintain trust
   stores of Trusted Verifiers, and will only release sensitive claims
   to Verifiers in the correct trust store, and the sensitive claims
   only leave the device encrypted for a certificate belonging to the
   Trusted Verifier.  This framework provides both access control for
   sensitive evidence claims, as well as transport confidentiality to
   protect against incidental logging and monitoring.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 25 July 2026.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
     1.1.  The Problem
     1.2.  The Framework
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
   3.  Classification of Claims
     3.1.  PII
     3.2.  DevID
     3.3.  Vendor Info
     3.4.  Unclassified
   4.  Technical Framework
     4.1.  Trusted Verifiers
     4.2.  Evidence Encryption
   5.  Security Considerations
   6.  IANA Considerations
   7.  References
     7.1.  Normative References
     7.2.  Informative References
   Acknowledgments
   Author's Address

1.  Introduction

1.1.  The Problem

   In its conception, remote attestation focuses on measured boot where
   measurement claims evidence typically consists of measurements of
   hardware and firmware components and this data is typically not
   thought of as being privacy-sensitive.  This document aims to
   challenge that assumption and provide a framework providing technical
   privacy controls under which remote attestation technology can safely
   grow to include sensitive claims.

   PII, as defined by the European Union's General Data Protection
   Regulation [GDPR] defines PII as data that can be used, either in
   isolation or in aggregate with other data, to identify and de-
   anonymize a human.  This obviously includes names, user names, email
   addresses, and the like, which are unlikely to appear in measured
   boot evidence.  However, the GDPR also considers machine identifiers
   that can be used as a proxy for PII either in isolation or in
   aggregate, and often considers cookies, IP addresses, and the like to
   be protected as PII.  This starts to get much closer to the types of
   data that could be reported by a measured boot system; consider in
   particular the detailed software manifest of an end-user device such
   as a mobile phone, and whether the specific combination of apps on
   the device on which you're reading this document could be used to
   uniquely identify the device, and by proxy, you.  Similarly, remote
   attestation evidence container formats such as the RATS Conceptual
   Message Wrapper [CMW] can be used to carry authentication formats
   such as WebAuthn [WebAuthn2] which can directly carry PII such as
   usernames and other PII-proxies.

   Device ID (DevID) is defined as any data that can, in isolation or in
   aggregate, with other data be used to uniquely identify the device.
   This includes the obvious things such as serial numbers of either the
   device or of certificates issued to the device, cryptographic public
   keys, and static addresses.  DevIDs also include data that act as a
   device fingerprint such as the manifest of connected peripheral
   devices, the manifest of installed software, the hash of customized
   config files, etc.  On end-user devices, DevIDs quickly become a
   proxy for PII and must be protected as such under the GDPR and
   similar regulation.

   Vendor Info is defined as any data that can, in isolation or in
   aggregate, be used to identify the manufacturer and model of the
   device.  This category of info is not known to have GDPR
   implications, but it is the subject of the 2023 IETF IAB Statement on
   the Risks of Attestation of Software and Hardware on the Open
   Internet [IAB-Statement-2023].  The statement notes that the Internet
   is built on a philosophy that any client which correctly implements
   the wire protocol can participate, regardless of its manufacturer.
   The statement notes that remote attestation technology provides a
   mechanism whereby a service provider could restrict services based on
   the manufacturer of the client device.  While this may be a
   reasonable thing to do in a private enterprise environment, it
   represents an existential threat to the openness of the public
   Internet.  For this reason, Vendor Info is considered to be a
   sensitive category of remote attestation evidence that carries human
   rights implications.

   A single remote attestation claim could be in more than one category.
   For example, a detailed hardware or software manifest could be both a
   fingerprint-style DevID (and therefore PII in the case of an end-user
   device), and also Vendor Info.

1.2.  The Framework

   This document provides a remote attestation privacy framework in two
   parts.

   First is a conceptual framework for classifying evidence claims as
   PII, DevID, Vendor Info, or unclassified.

   Second, is a technical framework whereby an attesting client (RATS
   Attester or Presenter) maintains one or more lists of Trusted
   Verifiers, represented by X.509 certificate trust stores, which are
   authorized to request evidence claims from one or more sensitivity
   categories.  This provides an enforcement point for access control,
   and leverages the commonly-understood implications of adding a root
   CA to your device.  Moreover, in addition to controlling their list
   of Trusted Verifiers, clients might also wish to protect against
   logging and monitoring of these claims in transit to the verifier,
   which is achieved by requiring the Verifier to provide an encryption
   certificate which is used by the Attester or Presenter to wrap the
   entire attestation payload containing sensitive claims in a JWE or
   CWE encrypted envelope.  This confidentiality mechanism provides
   additional benefit to Relying Parties which need to carry Evidence to
   the Verifier but actually do not want to be in a position of handling
   GDPR-protected data.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

3.  Classification of Claims

   For the purposes of this document, an attestation client is either an
   Attesting Environment directly, or a Presenter acting as a proxy
   between the Attester and the Verifier.  A conforming client is
   responsible for classifying every Evidence claim that it is capable
   of producing according to the following categories.

3.1.  PII

   The definition of Personally Identifiably Information (PII) used here
   is intended to align precisely with the definition in GDPR or other
   relevant user privacy regulations.  Implementers are free to identify
   PII as appropriate to their jurisdiction.  This document provides the
   following generalized definition:

      PII is any data that can be used, either in isolation or in
      aggregate with other data, to identify and de-anonymize a human.

3.2.  DevID

   A Device Identifier is any data that can be used to uniquely identify
   a device.  DevIDs typically fall into one of two categories:

   *  *Stable Identifiers* such as serial numbers or unique addresses.
      Sometimes DevIDs are hiding in places that even the implementers
      might not be aware of, such as DNs, serial numbers, or public keys
      of certificates issued to the hardware at manufacture-time.

   *  *Fingerprints* is any collection of data that, while not
      necessarily unique to the device, often ends up being so in
      practice.  This includes hardware manifests such as the model
      numbers of all connected peripheral devices, or manifests of all
      installed user software.  Care should also be taken when returning
      a hash of firmware, software, or filesystem contents, especially
      where this is user-customizable, as this can quickly become a
      unique fingerprint as well.

   In the case of end-user hardware such as laptops and mobile phones,
   DevIDs can often be used as a proxy for PII and are required to be
   handled as PII under the GDPR.  In the case of back-end datacenter
   and networking equipment, or IoT devices not directly related to a
   single human, DevIDs can be considered to be a distinct category from
   PII, and while not legally protected in the same way, is still
   considered sensitive as it can be used to monitor the movement of a
   physical or logical device across a network.

3.3.  Vendor Info

   Vendor Info is any Evidence claim that can be used, in isolation or
   in aggregate, to identify the model and manufacturer of a device.
   Obvious examples include version information about hardware,
   firmware, and software, or manufacture certificates.  But
   implementers SHOULD also be careful to consider fingerprints that are
   unique to a given device model or manufacturer, which could include
   hashes of hardware, firmware, or software, or could even include
   idiosyncracies in how the device handles certain requests or error
   conditions.

   As noted in the introduction, the main privacy concern here relates
   to enabling proprietary vendor lock-in, forced obsolescence, or any
   other circumstance in which a device that is compliant to the
   established wire protocols is blocked from full participation in the
   service.  Such behavior is completely reasonable in a closed
   enterprise network.  For example, a corporation, datacenter, or
   network provider is well within their rights to know exactly what is
   on their network, but on the open Internet this quickly develops into
   a human rights problem.  As such, it is in the best interest of end
   users that devices not disclose Vendor Info unless the device owner
   has explicitly consented to onboard the device into a network that
   requires this visibility.

3.4.  Unclassified

   This document defines an unclassified claim as any claim that does
   not meet the definition of any of the categories above, and thus MAY
   be freely released from the device without any access control or
   confidentiality protection.  This document does not preclude the
   development of further categories of sensitive claims.

4.  Technical Framework

   The technical framework presented here requires conformant
   implementations to do two things.  First, Clients MUST maintain lists
   of Trusted Verifiers and the categories of sensitive claims that they
   are authorized to request.  Second, Verifiers requesting sensitive
   claims are required to provide an encryption credential compatible
   with JWE or CWE in order for evidence to be encrypted for them.

4.1.  Trusted Verifiers

   Conformant Clients, which could be either an Attesting Environment
   directly, or a Presenter acting as a proxy for the Attester, MUST
   have a mechanism to maintain trust stores of X.509 certificates
   representing Trusted Verifiers.  The trusted certificates could be
   root CAs, self-signed certificates, end-entity certificates, or bare
   trust anchor public keys as per [?RFC5280] and [?RFC5914], or a JWK
   key as per [?RFC7517].  The details of maintaining a trust store and
   verifying a certificate or key against the trust store are left out
   of this document.

   Conformant Clients SHOULD have a mechanism to identify which Trusted
   Verifiers are authorized to request which categories of sensitive
   claims, though clients MAY opt for a simpler all-or-nothing approach
   where a Trusted Verifier can view all categories.

4.2.  Evidence Encryption

   Conformant Clients MUST NOT release attestation evidence containing
   sensitive claims in plaintext.  Instead, Verifies MUST provide an
   encryption credential chaining to a trust anchor in the relevant
   trust store, that can be used to encrypt the entire attestation
   payload.

   Where the Verifier's encryption credential is an X.509 certificate,
   it MUST contain an encryption-type keyUsage of keyEncipherment,
   dataEncipherment, or keyAgreement and MUST contain the Extended Key
   Usage id-kp-tbd-evidence-encryption.

   The encryption of the attestation payload is straightforward: if the
   attestation payload contains at least one claim of a sensitive
   category, then the entire payload MUST be wrapped inside a JWE
   [!RFC7516] or CWE [!RFC9052].  Where the attestation payload is a CMW
   [CMW], the choice of JWE or CWE encryption envelope SHOULD match the
   underlying type in order to reduce parser burden.  The encrypted
   payload MAY be placed back into a container format such as CMW, but
   implementers need to be careful that the container metadata does not
   leak the sensitive information that we are trying to protect!

   EDNOTE: does CMW not contain a mechanism for encrypted payloads?  Why
   not?

5.  Security Considerations

   TODO Security -- yeah, I'm sure we can think of some.

6.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions, unless we want to register the EKU
   OID id-kp-tbd-evidence-encryption here instead of needing a sister
   LAMPS doc.

7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

7.2.  Informative References

   [CMW]      Birkholz, H., Smith, N., Fossati, T., Tschofenig, H., and
              D. Glaze, "RATS Conceptual Messages Wrapper (CMW)", Work
              in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-rats-msg-wrap-23,
              11 December 2025, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/
              draft-ietf-rats-msg-wrap-23>.

   [GDPR]     European Parliament, "General Data Protection Regulation",
              n.d., <https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
              TXT/?uri=CELEX:02016R0679-20160504>.

   [IAB-Statement-2023]
              Internet Architecture Board, "IAB Statement on the Risks
              of Attestation of Software and Hardware on the Open
              Internet", n.d., <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/
              statement-iab-statement-on-the-risks-of-attestation-of-
              software-and-hardware-on-the-open-internet/>.

   [WebAuthn2]
              Word Wide Web Consortium, "Web Authentication: An API for
              accessing Public Key Credentials Level 2", n.d.,
              <https://www.w3.org/TR/webauthn-2/>.

Acknowledgments

   TODO acknowledge.

Author's Address

   Mike Ounsworth
   Cryptic Forest Software
   Email: mike@ounsworth.ca
